---
tags:
  - FTP
  - SFTP
---

# Side-by-side SFTP and FTP

### SSH File Transfer Protocol overview
Provides secure file transfer functionality over any reliable, bidirectional octect stream. Standard protocol for use with SSH2 but the protocol itself is general and independed of the rest of the SSH2 protocol suite. 
### File Transfer Protocol overview
Transfer data reliably and efficiently (and shield a user from variations in file storage systems among hosts). 

----------------------------------------------------

### Protocol Initialization SFTP 
Requests from the client to the server represent the various file system operations (Opening/closing files and directories). Responses to requests are returned over the same communication channel as the data. 
### Protocol Initialization FTP 
The control connection follows Telnet protocol. At the initialization of the user, standardized FTP commands are generated by the user process and transmitted to the server process via the control connection. FTP commands specify parameters for the data connection and the nature of the file system operation. The user data connection process listens on the specified port and the server initiates the data connection.

----------------------------------------------------

### Data Representation SFTP 
A FXP_READ request is sent with a specified handle and length of number of bytes to read. The data is just an arbiturary byte string containing the requested data. 
### Data Representation FTP 
The user specifies a representation type and a logical byte size for interpretation of the data (completely independent of the transfer byte size which is always 8 bits).